Cleaner Logistics and Supply Chain 7 (2023) 100109
Available online 8 May 2023
2772-3909/© 2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
The Aga Khan Development Network’s (AKDN) approach to supply chain 
carbon foot printing for healthcare providers 
Jerome Baddley a,*, Fawzia N. Rasheed b 
a Aga Khan Health Services, Geneva Switzerland 
b Aga Khan Development Network, Geneva, Switzerland   
A R T I C L E  I N F O   
Keywords: 
Carbon footprint 
Supply chain 
Low and middle-income countries 
Net zero 
Healthcare 
Greenhouse gases 
A B S T R A C T   
Very few examples of footprints exist for lower-middle-income countries and none for low-income countries. 
Where footprints do exist, they suggest that healthcare in LMICs is more carbon intensive per unit of expenditure 
than in high-income or upper-middle-income countries. At the same time, delivery of global commitments on 
Universal Health Coverage implies that healthcare provision in low and middle-income countries (LMICs) must 
grow more rapidly than anywhere else in the word. 
There has been little or no access to appropriate, comprehensive but affordable support to enable operations in 
LMICs to calculate full Scope 1,2 and 3 footprints. Without this it has been challenging for operations in LMICs to 
effectively target actions to reduce their emissions. 
With this in mind this paper sets out to demonstrate an approach to carbon foot printing healthcare in LMICs 
that is sufficiently robust to support targeted action, while using tools, resources and data that are freely 
accessible in all countries. 
This paper describes and discusses a 4-tiered ‘hybrid’ approach, developed using the international Greenhouse 
Gas Protocol. The approach was used successfully by staff to generate carbon footprints for healthcare organi­
sations in 8 LMICs in South and Central Asia and East Africa. The organisations covered all fall within the Aga 
Khan Development Network (AKDN); specifically, the Aga Khan Health Services (AKHS) and the Aga Khan 
Universities (AKU) 
The principles discussed in this paper, have been used to build a comprehensive carbon management tool in 
Microsoft Excel. The use of the approach and the tool has enabled AKDN healthcare providers to effectively, 
baseline, target and structure their carbon reduction activity. 
This work has had to pragmatically balance accuracy with deliverability in an LMIC context. While foot­
printing for Scope 1 and 2 has followed standard protocols, proxy data has been used to generate high level 
supply chain footprints, this has then been refined with data from suppliers. 
The tool and its accompanying guide are published and available, free to use, from AKDN to support other 
healthcare organisations in footprinting and reducing their own carbon emissions.   
1. Introduction 
This paper describes the approach taken to generate a full carbon 
footprint, including supply chain, for 2 healthcare providers of the Aga 
Khan Development Network (AKDN), Aga Khan Health Services (AKHS) 
and Aga Khan Universities (AKU). 
The 2 organisations provide primary, secondary, tertiary, and qua­
ternary healthcare across 8 low and middle-income countries (LMICs) in 
South and Central Asia and East Africa. AKDN services are largely 
weighted towards primary care in most regions, though with substantial 
hospital services in Pakistan. Together the health operations of the 
AKDN run 740 health facilities and 22 hospitals. 
As the first step towards achieving the AKDN-wide commitment to 
Net Zero carbon operations by 2030 (AKDN, 2022), both agencies aimed 
to produce a comprehensive carbon baseline. 
1.1. Current understanding of the carbon footprint of healthcare 
In recent years at least three publications have calculated figures for 
the global carbon footprint of healthcare (Lenzen et al., 2020; Arup and 
* Corresponding author. 
E-mail address: baddleyjerome@gmail.com (J. Baddley).  
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Cleaner Logistics and Supply Chain 
journal homepage: www.journals.elsevier.com/cleaner-logistics-and-supply-chain 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clscn.2023.100109 
Received 13 November 2022; Received in revised form 26 March 2023; Accepted 3 May 2023   
Cleaner Logistics and Supply Chain 7 (2023) 100109
2
HCWH, 2019; Pichler et al., 2019). These papers each highlighted that 
healthcare contributes 4–5% of global greenhouse gas emissions. 
In addition to these studies, several papers have been published 
providing carbon footprints for individual national healthcare systems, 
including Japan (Nansai et al., 2020), England (NHS England, 2020; 
Tennison et al., 2021), US (Eckelman et al., 2020), Canada (Eckelman 
et al., 2018), China (Wu, 2019), and Australia (Malik et al., 2018). 
All three global papers and several of the national papers use vari­
ations of the Extended Environmental Multi Region Input Output (EE- 
MRIO) methodology. EE-MRIO methodologies track the flow of money 
and associated carbon emissions between sectors and countries, 
assigning country and sector specific greenhouse gas emissions in­
tensities to units of economic activity. Carbon footprints are calculated 
as a function of expenditure and these sector specific carbon intensity 
multipliers. 
Top-down EE-MRIO approaches can be contrasted with bottom-up 
process-based approaches, where a footprint is built up, in high reso­
lution, from actual resource use data and resource specific emissions 
factors. 
Hybrid methodologies, such as the one used by the NHS in England 
(NHS England, 2020; Tennison et al., 2021), combine the 2 approaches, 
with as much of the footprint as possible calculated bottom-up, using a 
process-based approach. Remaining areas, often relating to the supply 
chain, are then calculated from expenditure and EE-MRIO multipliers. 
Malik, Lenzen, et al., 2018 includes an excellent description of process- 
based vs EE-MRIO approaches (Malik, Lenzen et al., 2018). 
It is encouraged as good practice by the international GHG Protocol 
(WRI and WBCSD, 2013), that organisations refine the accuracy of their 
supply chain emissions calculations, using carbon intensity data from 
their actual suppliers. 
To date, very few healthcare providers, in either LMICs or higher- 
income countries, have published detailed supply chain footprints. 
There are also no examples in the literature of healthcare supply chain 
footprints that have gone beyond top-down EE-MRIO methods, to 
deliver the granular level of detail encouraged by GHG protocol 
guidance. 
The current published literature focusses on high-income and upper- 
middle-income countries (Fig. 1). Healthcare in LMICs has received far 
less attention. To date it would appear that country level footprints for 
healthcare in low-income countries remains unrepresented in the pub­
lished literature. 
The focus on wealthier countries is understandable, given their 
larger current and historical contribution to global emissions. It is also 
intuitive to expect higher relative contributions of emissions per capita 
for healthcare in wealthier countries, given higher per capita spending 
on healthcare, larger numbers of hospital beds and facilities. However, 
using data derived from the available literature, (Rasheed et al., 2021) 
the carbon intensity per US$ for healthcare in LMICs seems substantially 
higher than in high-income countries (HICs.) (Table 1). 
Over the next 15 years, spending on healthcare in LMICs is expected 
to grow rapidly, not least as a result of efforts to meet targets for Uni­
versal Health Coverage (UHC). If services in LMICs grow without in­
vestment in reducing carbon intensity, growth could add substantially to 
global carbon emissions. Based on projections for spending on UHC 
alone, which, positioned around primary health care delivery, repre­
sents a fraction of spending on healthcare in LMICs, such investments 
could add over 16% to the global carbon footprint of healthcare 
(Rasheed et al., 2021). 
Healthcare providers in LMICs also share much of their supply chain 
with those in higher-income countries. 
AKDN’s health operations span 8 LMICs, three of these countries had 
high level EE-MRIO footprints covered in the published literature (India, 
(Pichler et al., 2019; Lenzen et al., 2020) (Arup and HCWH, 2019) 
Kenya, and Kyrgyzstan (Lenzen et al., 2020)). Footprints for healthcare 
in Afghanistan, Pakistan, Tajikistan, Tanzania, and Syria were not 
covered in any of the published literature. 
1.2. Aims of this paper 
The wider aim of this paper is to support a greater engagement in 
Greenhouse Gas (GHG) management from healthcare organisations in 
LMICs. Firstly, by addressing the absence in the literature of any detailed 
footprinting work for healthcare from LMICs and LICs. Secondly, by 
demonstrating a pragmatic and replicable approach that has been taken 
to generate carbon footprints by the healthcare operations of AKDN. 
This paper also seeks to demonstrate the value of refining the supply 
chain footprint for healthcare organisations with emissions data from 
individual suppliers. 
It is intended that the findings of this work and the footprinting tool 
created should be of practical use to other healthcare providers in LMICs 
and higher-income countries alike. 
The approach detailed in this paper follows the standard methodol­
ogy set down by the international GHG Protocol, with emissions cat­
egorised by Scopes (WRI and WBCSD, 2004).  
• Scope 1: Direct GHG emissions  
• Scope 2: Indirect GHG emissions from electricity and heat networks  
• Scope 3: All other indirect GHG emissions. Typically, these are 
emissions arising upstream in the supply chain, or downstream with 
customers or product end of life. 
Both agencies, henceforth referred to as the health operations of the 
AKDN, collaborated to produce as comprehensive a carbon footprint as 
possible, across Scopes 1,2 and 3. A hybrid approach was used, 
employing a combination of bottom-up and top-down methodologies. 
Emissions calculations for the supply chain were refined further using 
supplier specific carbon intensities, calculated from suppliers own 
published data. 
The healthcare operations of AKDN required 2 key outputs from this 
work:  
1. Identify emissions hotspots where action should be targeted. 
2. Provide a sufficiently robust baseline which the impacts of in­
terventions could be tracked against. 
The approach to footprinting needed to cover all aspects of direct 
operations, as well as the supply chain, which was expected to represent 
a large part of the overall footprint. 
Footprinting work covered operations in Afghanistan, India, Kenya, 
Kyrgyzstan, Pakistan, Syria, Tanzania, and Tajikistan. While good data 
on expenditure and resource use was available, comprehensive, 
geographically specific carbon factor sets were not readily available for 
Fig. 1. Coverage of the GHG emissions from healthcare in LMICs across three studies evaluating the global carbon footprint of healthcare.  
J. Baddley and F.N. Rasheed                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Cleaner Logistics and Supply Chain 7 (2023) 100109
3
these 8 countries. 
In the absence of easily available EE-MRIO data for the countries 
covered in this study, the methodology that the health operations of the 
AKDN have developed uses EE-MRIO data from the UK as a proxy, 
refining this with suppliers’ data where available. This paper covers:  
• The methodology, rationale for, and limitations of this approach.  
• Experience of using this approach in 8 LMICs.  
• The transferability of this model to other healthcare providers. 
The results compare the proportional splits for the carbon footprints 
of several AKDN healthcare providers, identifying emissions hotspots. 
Carbon intensity values per US$ expenditure for several healthcare op­
erations are also compared at three increasingly refined levels of foot­
print resolution. 
2. Methods and materials 
2.1. The AKDN approach to calculating carbon emissions of healthcare 
operations. 
In the absence of comprehensive sets of emissions factors and carbon 
intensity data for the focus countries, an approach was developed to 
allow the calculation of a sufficiently granular footprint. 
To generate an initial ‘top-down’ footprint estimate for each opera­
tion, high-level EE-MRIO carbon intensity data per US$ for the health­
care sector in each country was sourced. Where this was not available, 
regional, or income group averages were generated (Appendix G). 
A more granular approximation of the supply chain footprint was 
then established by applying EE-MRIO multipliers from the UK to AKDN 
spending data. UK factors (University of Leeds, 2020) were aligned to 
each operation’s financial accounting codes and averaged to produce 
approximate carbon intensities for each code (Appendix C and D). These 
factors were then applied to each operation’s expenditure data against 
each of the codes. This stage was used to identify supply chain emissions 
hotspots. A similar approach has been used in the UK for more than 10 
years in the annual calculation of the carbon footprint of the NHS in 
England (Tennison et al., 2021). 
Concerted effort was then applied to improve the accuracy and 
granularity of emissions data in hotspot areas, by swapping out spend 
and carbon data with data for spend and emissions intensities from in­
dividual suppliers. This started with the largest suppliers and amounts 
spent. Carbon intensity data were secured for the largest suppliers in 
each hotspot area. This data was expressed in the form of Kgs of CO2 
equivalent (KgCO2e) for Scopes 1,2 and 3 per US$ revenue. 
Both annual revenue and annual carbon footprint data are generally 
available for larger suppliers (See Appendix F). As such, calculations of 
emissions arising from amounts spent with these suppliers was based on 
their own published data. As suppliers often report their emissions using 
slightly different boundaries and completeness, especially at Scope 3, 
effort was applied to ensure that our calculated suppliers emissions in­
tensities were also fair and comparable (See Appendix E). 
All Scope 1, 2 and non-supply chain Scope 3 emissions were 
calculated using established GHG protocol footprinting methodologies 
(WRI and WBCSD, 2004) and bottom-up data from healthcare opera­
tions. Expenditure in these areas was excluded from EE-MRIO foot­
printing to avoid double counting. 
Using this approach, the footprint could be refined through 4 levels 
or Tiers of data quality. Tier 4 represented the most accurate bottom-up 
calculations covering all Scope 1 and 2 emissions and some Scope 3 
emissions. Tier 1 represented the least accurate top-down estimates. An 
outline is provided below with full details in Sections 2.2 to 2.5.  
• Tier 1- Scoping. High level estimates for total footprint based on 
regional average or national figures for health sector carbon intensity 
by country.  
• Tier 2-Hot-spotting/Screening. Supply chain emissions calculated 
using UK consumption based GHG intensity (per US$) and AKDN 
health operations spend, grouped by categories.  
• Tier 3-Hybrid top-down/bottom-up foot printing. Supply chain 
emissions calculated using suppliers own data as carbon intensities 
per US$ and AKDN spend with each supplier.  
• Tier 4 -bottom-up foot printing. Scope 1, 2 and some Scope 3. 
Product specific GHG emissions for some individual high carbon 
products. 
The aim throughout was to generate a hybrid footprint that used the 
highest quality (Highest Tier) data possible at each point, with lower 
Tier data used to fill any remaining gaps. 
This methodology allowed the generation of 3 footprints and 3 cor­
responding carbon intensities per US$ expenditure for each 
organisation.  
1. Top-down, EE-MRIO only, based on national or regional average 
intensity data (Tier 1)  
2. Hybrid, EE-MRIO based on UK multipliers (Tier 2) plus bottom up 
for resource use (Tier 4),  
3. Refined hybrid, EE-MRIO based on UK multipliers (Tier 2) with 
some supply chain footprint improved with suppliers own data (Tier 
3) plus bottom up for resource use (Tier 4). 
2.2. Tier 1- country specific data for healthcare carbon intensity 
To support an initial scoping of each operations’ full carbon foot­
print, covering all major GHGs (carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous 
oxide), data from a paper by Manfred Lenzen (Lenzen et al., 2020) was 
drawn upon. This paper provided high-level figures (multipliers) for 
health sector GHG emissions intensities (KgCO2equivalent/US$) 
generated using the EE-MRIO model. 
Emissions were estimated for each of the health operations of the 
AKDN, using total spend (i.e., including salaries, and all purchased 
goods and services) multiplied by a healthcare sector carbon intensity 
factor for each country from Lenzen’s paper. 
Only three of the countries where AKDN delivers health services 
(India, Kenya, and Kyrgyzstan) were represented in Lenzen’s data. To 
address the lack of data for the other 5 countries, regional and income 
group averages were developed from the available data (Appendix G). 
Geographic ranges were selected to reflect WHO regions, economic 
groups reflect World Bank income classifications. 
This approach provided an initial ‘Top down’ footprint and carbon 
intensity for each operation that could serve as a reference point to 
compare results from our hybrid and refined hybrid footprints. 
2.3. Tier 2- sector specific data 
Generating more granular estimates for the supply chain footprints 
for the health operations of the AKDN, required each operations’ spend 
to be mapped to more granular consumption-based emissions factors or 
multipliers for individual sectors. 
Table 1 
Healthcare sector emissions by country economic classification.  
Income group 
No of countries with 
data 
Average (range) CO2 intensity 
(kgCO2e/$) 
Low-income 
0 
No data 
Lower-middle 
income 
7 
1.44 (0.5–3.9) 
Upper-middle 
income 
17 
0.87 (0.23–2.08) 
Low and middle- 
income 
24 
1.03 (0.23–3.9) 
High-income 
37 
0.38 (0.07–2.09)  
J. Baddley and F.N. Rasheed                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Cleaner Logistics and Supply Chain 7 (2023) 100109
4
While nationally specific industry sector level EE-MRIO factors exist 
for the LMICs where AKHS and AKU work, they were not easily 
obtainable. Sourcing or generating specific country-level multipliers 
would have increased the effort, time and expenditure needed for this 
work. As Tier-2-foot printing for AKDN was primarily intended to be 
used for scoping and identifying emissions hotspots, a pragmatic 
approach to the sourcing of factors was taken. 
The most comprehensive publicly available source of consumption- 
based multipliers for specific products and services was from the UK 
Govt. Department for Food and Rural Affairs (DEFRA). We opted to 
evaluate whether using the UK multipliers could be useful in generating 
supply chain carbon hotspots for the health operations of the AKDN (see 
limitations Section 5.2). 
Footprinting using the UK DEFRA factors was achieved by mapping 
60 AKHS/AKU financial accounting spend categories, to relevant factors 
from the 312 UK consumption-based carbon factors for products and 
services (University of Leeds, 2020)(see Appendix C for mapping grid). 
Once all spend categories had been mapped, an average of all the 
relevant UK DEFRA factors was generated for each of the spend cate­
gories of the health operations of the AKDN. Average factors were then 
converted from KgCO2e/£ to KgCO2e/US$ at a rate of $0.75 to £1 (See 
Appendix D). 
The calculated spend category factors were then built into AKDN’s 
excel-based, carbon management tool. This was provided to AKDN 
health staff in each of the 11 operations across 8 countries. Staff were 
encouraged to enter spend data in US$ by spend category for each 
operation. 
The Tier 2 calculation provided an initial estimate of the scale and 
the relative percentage of the total supply chain emissions within each 
spend category. The resulting data was used to identify a list of high 
priority (greater than5% of emissions) and medium priority (1–5% of 
emissions) spend categories for each country. Engagement efforts to 
improve data quality and reduce emissions could then be focussed on 
products and suppliers within these areas. 
At this point, to avoid double counting, spending categories such as 
electricity or vehicle fuels, where a ‘bottom-up’ (Tier 4) calculation had 
been possible, were excluded from the supply chain emissions 
calculations. 
2.4. Tier 3- supplier specific data 
Following the identification of the major carbon hotspots in the 
supply chain, effort was devoted to refining emissions calculations in 
these areas. Emissions data calculated at Tier 2 by spend category, was 
replaced with data derived from spend with specific suppliers. In­
tensities were only generated for suppliers who provided full data for 
their Scope 1, 2 and upstream Scope 3 emissions categories. Appendix E 
provides the full methodology used to generate GHG intensities per US$ 
revenue for suppliers. 
For AKDN staff, a specific Tier 3 calculation function was embedded 
into the AKDN carbon management tool. The tool was pre-populated 
with the carbon intensity data for the identified suppliers 
(Appendix F). Procurement teams entered their own spending data. 
2.5. Tier 4 – Bottom-up, resource-specific data. 
Tier 4 data was generated using a standard GHG protocol approach 
for calculating Scope 1, 2 and some Scope 3 areas. Scope 1 included 
operational use of fuels, refrigerants, and in-use emissions from anaes­
thetic gases (Sevoflurane, Desflurane, Halothane, Isoflurane and Nitrous 
Oxide). Scope 2 included electricity using (IEA, 2020) emissions factors. 
Scope 3 areas included waste, contractor logistics and employee 
business travel. 
Consumption data was provided by country operations and appro­
priate emissions factors selected either from DEFRA (DEFRA and DBEIS, 
2021) or the IPPC Emissions Factors Database (IPCC, 2020). In some 
cases, carbon factors were user modified in the tool to reflect local 
biomass mix in fuels. 
Country operations also provided the number and type of dispensed 
inhalers. The carbon impact of inhalers at Tier 4 was limited to the 
propellants that they contain. Where the propellant was unknown, the 
most commonly used gas, HFA134a, was assumed. Where the weight of 
propellant was unknown, and average propellant weight was used. 
More detail on the carbon factors and approach used at Tier 4 can be 
reviewed in the AKDN carbon footprinting tool and its associated 
guidance (AKDN, 2021a,b). Carbon impacts from the manufacture of 
refrigerants, inhalers and anaesthetics were picked up in Tier 2 and 3 
supply chain factors. 
3. Results 
Most of the health operations of the AKDN were able to report data to 
the Tier 2 level, with spending data in US$ provided against institutional 
spend categories. All operations were able to report detailed Tier 4 data, 
to calculate Scope 1,2 and some Scope 3 emissions. 
The supply chain areas identified as hotspots through Tier 2 scoping 
varied, this appeared to depend on the type of services provided by 
operations. Across all the health operations of the AKDN several spend 
categories stood out as hotspot areas (Fig. 2). 
Generally, the footprint for operations was dominated by four spend 
categories:  
i. Medical and Surgical Supplies  
ii. Lab Consumables, Chemical & Supplies  
iii. Medical, Surgical Lab Equipment  
iv. Pharmaceuticals 
On average, emissions from these four areas made up 86% of each 
organisation’s total footprint (Appendix H). Smaller contributions were 
also notable from construction, food supplies, imaging supplies and es­
tates equipment (MRO supplies). There was a higher contribution for 
Medical Surgical and Lab equipment for the small AKHS operation in 
Syria; at the time a largely field-based outreach program. 
For the four clinical categories identified as carbon hotspots, the 65 
largest suppliers (by AKDN health expenditure) were identified across 
both agencies. Together these 65 suppliers represented 67% of the 
estimated 2019 supply chain carbon footprint. 
AKDN staff were able to source emissions data, for 22 of the largest 
health care suppliers, directly from these companies’ websites 
(Appendix F). For 21 of these companies, it was possible to generate 
Scope 1 and 2 carbon intensities per US$ revenue. For 16 of these 
companies, it was possible to generate reasonably comparable Scope 1,2 
and 3 (including full value chain) carbon intensities (See Appendix E for 
the detailed calculation methodology). 
By Q3 2021, six of the nine AKHS operations were able to report 
spending at the T3 level, with a proportion of spend allocated to specific 
suppliers. Operations were able to map between 6% and 30% of their 
spend to specific suppliers for whom carbon intensity data was available 
(Appendix H). 
Four of the nine AKHS operations also provided total turnover data 
in US$ for 1 quarter. This allowed comparison of each operation’s 
calculated carbon intensity across 3 levels of resolution: ‘Top-down’ (EE- 
MRIO only), hybrid and refined hybrid. 
Table 2 shows data for 1 quarter from these 4 AKHS operations. 
Emissions intensity is based on total pay, and non-pay expenditure. 
For Kenya a specific top-down EE-MRIO carbon intensity factor for 
healthcare (0.446 KgCO2e/$) was available from Lenzen’s work. This 
figure appeared to correlate fairly well with the 0.42KgCO2e/$ carbon 
intensity figure, generated for Kisumu using our hybrid methodology. 
There appeared to be less alignment between the top-down intensity 
figure and ours for Mombasa (0.557 KgCO2e/$). 
Once 21% of Kisumu’s spending had been footprinted using Kisumu 
J. Baddley and F.N. Rasheed                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Cleaner Logistics and Supply Chain 7 (2023) 100109
5
suppliers’ own emissions intensities, AKDN’s refined hybrid carbon in­
tensity figure for Kisumu appeared to be 26% lower than suggested by 
the top-down data. For Mombasa, once a similar 21% of spending had 
been footprinted using suppliers’ own emissions intensities, AKDN’s 
refined hybrid carbon intensity figure was only 0.77% higher than 
suggested by the top-down data. 
A similar trend was noted with Tanzania. The average country level 
EE-MRIO carbon intensity factor for healthcare in Africa (0.787 
KgCO2e/$) compared fairly well with the 0.773 KgCO2e/$ carbon in­
tensity factor calculated using AKDNs hybrid methodology. However, 
once 30% of spending had been footprinted using AKDN suppliers’ own 
carbon intensity data, to generate the refined hybrid figure, the carbon 
intensity for the healthcare operations of the AKDN in Tanzania 
appeared 25% lower than suggested by the top-down EE-MRIO data. 
A more significant divergence was evident between figures from 
(Lenzen et al., 2020) and the figures generated by hybrid and refined 
hybrid methodologies for the healthcare operations of the AKDN in 
India. Lenzen’s carbon intensity for healthcare in India was reported as 
3.935KgCO2e/$, while AKDN calculated figures under the hybrid 
methodology showed 0.742KgCO2e/$. 
Even partial refinement of AKDN health operations’ footprint cal­
culations for supply chain emissions from Tier 2 to Tier 3, i.e., using 
actual data from suppliers, generally resulted in a reduction in emissions 
intensity. This can be seen by comparing the values in Table 2 for hybrid 
and refined hybrid. In Tanzania for example, after allocation of 30% of 
the spend to specific suppliers, the carbon intensity fell by 24% (from 
0.773KgCO2e/$, to 0.586KgCO2e/$). The contribution of supply chain 
emissions to the overall footprint in Tanzania fell from 82% to 76%. 
This consistent reduction seems driven by an 8 to 9-fold divergence 
between the average carbon intensity per US$ reported by 
Table 2 
Calculated carbon intensities for 4 AKHS operations in 3 countries (1 quarter 2021/22).   
Kisumu-Kenya 
Tanzania 
India 
Mombasa-Kenya 
1. Top down- Emissions intensity Tier 1 (EE-MRIO) only (KgCO2e/$)) 
0.446 
0.787 
3.935 
0.446 
Source- See Appendix G, and (Lenzen et al., 2020) 
Kenya specific 
multiplier 
Africa 
average  
India specific 
multiplier 
Kenya specific 
multiplier 
2. Hybrid- Emissions intensity. Tier 2 + Tier 4 where possible (KgCO2e/$) 
0.420 
0.773 
0.742 
0.557 
% Total emissions-in supply chain 
93% 
82% 
81% 
92% 
3. Refined Hybrid- Emissions intensity. Tier 2 with Tier 3 and Tier 4 where possible 
(KgCO2e/$) 
0.329 
0.586 
0.721 
0.450 
% Tier 2 spending refined to Tier 3 
21% 
30% 
6% 
21% 
% Total emissions-in supply chain 
91% 
76% 
81% 
90%  
Fig. 2. AKDN Supply chain carbon emissions split by country and spend category/cost code, calculated using spending data for Q4 2020. (Fig. 2 data is supplied in 
Appendix I). 
J. Baddley and F.N. Rasheed                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Cleaner Logistics and Supply Chain 7 (2023) 100109
6
pharmaceutical suppliers and the equivalent multiplier from the UK 
DEFRA data (Appendix F). This is explored further in the limitations 
section. 
4. Discussion 
4.1. Comparison between AKDN results and ‘Top down’ Tier 1 footprint 
estimates. 
Before we chose to use the EE-MRIO multiplier data from Lenzen for 
our Tier 1 approach, Lenzen’s data was cross-referenced with data from 
(Pichler et al., 2019) and (Arup and HCWH, 2019). Data for 39 countries 
was available, or could be derived from, two or three of these sources. 
While country-level carbon footprints showed variation between these 3 
sources, they were mostly consistent in scale (Appendix A and 
Appendix B). There were a few notable exceptions where emissions in­
tensities for countries derived from these sources showed a high level of 
divergence. Lenzen calculated significantly higher footprint values for 
Russia, India, Japan, Slovakia, Brazil, and Spain, while Pichler calcu­
lated a significantly higher footprint for China. Lenzen suggests that 
these variations might be due to differences in the healthcare expendi­
ture data used in each case. Lenzen also considered all GHGs, up to the 
year 2015, whereas Pichler et al only considered carbon dioxide. 
The dataset published by Lenzen et al had the largest number of data 
points, covering 66 countries, including 9 lower-middle-income coun­
tries. None of the papers provided any data for LICs. To maximise 
coverage in both GHGs and LMICs, Lenzen’s figures were chosen for Tier 
1 scoping. 
Where comparison was possible, (Table 2) emissions intensities 
based on top-down EE MRIO Tier 1 data did appear to show some level 
of agreement with our hybrid and refined hybrid results. 
While there appeared to be a reasonable concordance between the 
carbon intensities calculated bottom up and top down for Tanzania and 
Kenya, a significant divergence was noted between our calculated car­
bon intensity for operations in India and the data from Lenzen’s work. 
Lenzen reported a carbon footprint for healthcare in India of 
289MtCO2e, however (Pichler et al., 2019) calculated this as 74MtCO2 
and (Arup and HCWH, 2019) calculated a footprint of 37.2MtCO2 
(Appendix A). 
Lenzen’s figures for healthcare expenditure in India in 2015 
($73,330 M) matched reasonably well with WHO figures for the same 
year ($77,190 M) (WHO, 2015). Applying Lenzen’s expenditure figure 
to Pichler’s emissions data would suggest a carbon intensity for 
healthcare in India of around 1.01KgCO2/$. The same calculation with 
Arup & HCWH emissions data would suggest an intensity of 0.51KgCO2/ 
$. 
This suggests that the mismatch between our hybrid and refined 
hybrid carbon intensities for AKHS India’s operations and Lenzen’s top- 
down intensity figure may be the result of some aspect of Lenzen’s 
calculations for India, rather than a systematic issue with our foot­
printing approach. 
For AKHS operations in Kisumu and Mombasa, the differences be­
tween the top-down carbon intensities from Lenzen’s work for Kenya 
and the intensities calculated using our hybrid and refined hybrid ap­
proaches, serves to highlight the potential for variations in carbon in­
tensity between similar operations in the same country. 
Both operations include a small hospital of similar size, each with an 
associated network of primary care facilities. For Kisumu this primary 
care network comprises around 62% of the floor area, compared to 52% 
for Mombasa. The climate in Mombasa is consistently hotter than 
Kisumu, requiring substantially more electricity consumption for cool­
ing. Data provided from 2019 also suggests that around 26% more pa­
tients are treated each year in the Mombasa hospital and its outreach 
network. It is probable that these variables contribute to the overall 
differences in carbon intensity between these 2 otherwise similar 
operations. 
For individual healthcare providers, top-down only approaches, such 
as those used to footprint national healthcare systems, may be a useful 
starting point to gain an idea of the scale of their emissions. However, 
national averages cannot represent the diverse carbon intensities of in­
dividual providers in a country. Neither do these help providers in tar­
geting emissions hotspots or in tracking efforts to address these. In some 
cases, top down only methodologies also seem to generate very different 
results from more granular hybrid models (see Table 2). 
4.2. Hybrid footprint 
Our hybrid footprint relied on the application of emissions intensities 
from the UK. The discussion of the benefits and limitations of this 
approach are covered in Section 5. 
While we have characterised levels of footprint data quality with a 
Tier 1–4 ranking, in principle, our hybrid approach is similar to that 
used by the NHS (NHS England, 2020; Tennison et al., 2021). 
Studies from (Lenzen et al., 2020; Arup and HCWH, 2019; Pichler 
et al., 2019), based on EE-MRIO, suggest that in excess of 70% of the 
GHG emissions in healthcare may be attributed to the supply chain. The 
most recent data from the NHS in England has put the figure at 66% 
(NHS England, 2020), while (Wu, 2019) identified 84% from ‘Purchased 
goods and services’ for the Chinese healthcare sector. For the Australian 
healthcare system, (Malik et al., 2018) calculated that 90% of the carbon 
footprint stemmed from indirect CO2 emissions due to purchases be­
tween the different economic sectors that fed into the health-care sector. 
The results of our initial work in Q4 2020 (Appendix I), suggested 
that the percentage of emissions attributed to the supply chain in LMICs 
may follow a similar pattern, with 73% to 97% of emissions (average 
86%) sitting in the supply chain. 
The percentage split between supply and non-supply chain emissions 
provided some initial confidence that, as well as its potential use in 
identifying emissions hotspots, the UK factor set may not be an entirely 
unreasonable proxy for what the GHG protocol describes as ‘secondary 
source’ data. As such, factors derived from the UK data set, may be 
suitable for use in a hybrid footprint, especially if effort were applied to 
further refine the footprint with supplier specific data. 
The results of our hybrid footprint show a potential divergence from 
the evidence in other published literature with regards to the proportion 
of the supply chain attributed to pharmaceuticals and medical equip­
ment. The average of 86% of the footprint allocated to pharmaceuticals 
and medical products is a much higher proportion than reported else­
where. For example, across the 10 health operations of the AKDN that 
reported pharmaceuticals expenditure (Excluding the very small oper­
ation in Syria) pharmaceutical made up 17–52% of the total footprint, 
with an average of 36%. By contrast (Eckelman et al., 2018) found 
pharmaceuticals making 26% of the total life cycle healthcare GHG 
emissions for Canada, 10% for the US and 18% for Australia (NHS En­
gland, 2020) attributed 20% to medicines and chemicals. 
This divergence could be in part down to the services that are picked 
up within the footprinting boundaries of top-down work. National level 
footprints calculated with EE-MRIO methodologies tend to look at entire 
healthcare systems, while our tightly focussed studies look specifically 
at primary and hospital care. National top-down methodologies may 
also pick up additional aspects of public health provision, ambulance 
services, national and regional administration or other services which 
may be less likely to show a heavy use of pharmaceuticals and medical 
products. The footprint for the NHS, also includes staff commuting and 
patient travel. 
Additional comparative work, using country specific Tier 2 factors 
for the countries we have studied, could help to further validate our 
chosen approach to use a UK factor set as a proxy. 
4.3. Refined hybrid footprint 
Invariably, as we refined our hybrid footprints with data from our 
J. Baddley and F.N. Rasheed                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Cleaner Logistics and Supply Chain 7 (2023) 100109
7
actual suppliers, we found that AKDN healthcare operations footprints 
and their resulting carbon intensities fell (Table 2). Generally, the more 
substantial the proportion of the footprint refined with suppliers’ data, 
the larger the fall. 
The companies for which Scope 1,2 and 3 data could be sourced had 
a collective annual revenue of $923Bn. This included 10 pharmaceutical 
sector companies with a combined annual revenue of $464.5Bn. 
Together these 10 companies constitute around 37% of the $1.27 trillion 
global pharma market (Statista, 2021). 
The Tier 2 carbon intensity for ‘Medicines and medical products’, 
derived from UK DEFRA data (converted to US$ at 0.75 US$ per £), was 
1.936kgCO2e/$ (Appendix D). Most multinational suppliers in the 
‘Medicines and medical product’ category, in the supply chain for the 
health operations of the AKDN appear to perform substantially better 
than this. 
For the 10 pharmaceutical product suppliers, the average reported 
full carbon intensity, including value chain, was 0.202kgCO2e/$. If 
weighted by annual revenue, this would suggest a carbon intensity of 
0.1799kgCO2e/$ for a ‘medicines’ sub-category (Appendix H). 
The evidence so far suggests that the sector wide carbon intensities 
for healthcare products from DEFRA, calculated using a top-down (EE- 
MRIO) methodology are 8 to 9 times larger than the Scope 1,2 and 3 
emissions intensities derived from suppliers’ own data. 
This divergence underlines the need, expressed in the GHG protocol 
scope 3 guidance, for those calculating carbon footprints for their supply 
chains to look beyond EE-MRIO only approaches. 
While a definitive explanation for the observed divergence would 
require further research, a number of key variables could have a sig­
nificant impact.  
• The medicines and medical products companies that make up the 
rest of the global market, may have far higher carbon intensities than 
those of the multinationals reviewed.  
• Top-down EE-MRIO methodologies and bottom-up methodologies 
used by industry may use different emissions boundaries. A broader 
basket of emissions may be allocated to individual sectors in EE- 
MRIO multipliers, than are covered under healthcare product man­
ufacturers GHG reporting, especially under upstream scope 3. 
• There is a 1–2-year time-lag between the EE-MRIO emissions in­
tensities that we have used and the annually published data from 
suppliers. This may mean that some emissions reductions from 
suppliers have yet to show in the EE-MRIO data.  
• The relatively lower price of products negotiated by the NHS in the 
UK market may make healthcare products look more carbon inten­
sive in the UK, than global averages. 
It is possible to evaluate, in outline, the potential impact of the last of 
these 4 points. Work by the US Ways and Means Committee in 2019 (The 
Committee on Ways and Means, United States Congress, 2019) sug­
gested that in the UK, pharmaceutical costs were on average 30% less 
than in other countries. In this case, price difference alone would be 
insufficient to explain an 8 to 9-fold divergence in carbon intensity per 
unit of currency. Due to the volumes of products the NHS purchases, the 
NHS supply chain for these types of products may also be weighted to­
wards the larger multinational companies, whose carbon intensity data 
is already captured above. 
The impact of this apparent divergence may be significant for the 
NHS in England (Tennison et al., 2021; NHS England, 2020) and other 
national footprints relying on EE-MRIO factors for their supply chain 
calculations. For example, the most recent data from the NHS (NHS 
England, 2020) shows that the carbon impact of medicines and medical 
equipment makes up 30% of the NHS carbon footprint. If similar EE- 
MRIO factors have been used and multinational suppliers published 
scope 3 carbon emissions are correct, then the carbon footprint for 
medicines and medical products in the NHS supply chain (and indeed 
that of other national footprints) may be substantially less than is 
currently indicated. 
That it has been possible to source or derive reasonably comparable 
carbon intensities for suppliers (Appendix F), should be encouraging to 
those looking to engage with their supply chain. Many suppliers are 
already taking action. The evidence that the data provided by suppliers 
has thus far resulted in reductions in AKDN’s calculated supply chain 
emissions, should provide an additional incentive for other organisa­
tions, and those building a national picture of healthcare carbon foot­
prints, to use a refined hybrid approach. 
However, such downward trends from improving data resolution 
cannot be assumed for the future. It is possible, that once carbon in­
tensity data becomes available for smaller national and regional sup­
pliers, that these prove to be far more carbon intensive than the 
multinationals for whom data is currently available. In this case, supply 
chain footprints for AKDN, and any other organisation using this 
approach, may climb again. 
5. Limitations 
Due to the hybrid approach combining multiple bottom-up datasets 
with top-down MRIO-based results, it was not feasible to conduct a 
comprehensive uncertainty analysis. However, the limitations of our 
methodology are discussed in some detail below. 
5.1. Tier 1 approach 
Relying on a single source for the Tier 1 multipliers presents a po­
tential limitation. The selection of Lenzen’s data was made after criti­
cally reviewing 3 possible options. As Tier 1 data was only used as a 
point of reference, this level of uncertainty was deemed acceptable. 
There was a high variance in the country-level carbon intensity data 
within the geographic and economic groups (Appendix G). Given the 
high level of uncertainty in the averages that we used where country 
specific data was absent, it was expected that the Tier 1 approach would 
only be useful in providing an indication of scale and a level of valida­
tion for more granular analysis. 
Further research to generate additional top-down data for lower- 
middle and low-income countries could potentially improve confidence 
in an approach reliant on regional or economic group averages. 
5.2. Tier 2 approach 
The GHGP guidelines for Scope 3 accounting suggest undertaking 
initial scoping and hot spotting activity for supply chain emissions using 
‘Secondary sources’ or proxy data (WRI and WBCSD, 2013). The GHGP 
guidelines further suggest that this data should then be refined with data 
from an organisation’s own suppliers. 
Factors based on EE-MRIO are classed in the GHG Protocol as low 
resolution ‘Secondary data’ (WRI and WBCSD, 2013). Average carbon 
intensities for industry sectors, or carbon intensities of specific classes of 
consumer products, can help identify emissions hotspots in a healthcare 
providers supply chain, however, do not represent the carbon intensity 
of an organisation’s specific suppliers or products. 
High-level EE-MIRO factors or ‘multipliers’ are available pre- 
calculated for many countries. For many EU, OECD and HICs, these 
factors are available for free online (Stadler et al., 2015). Where factors 
are not readily available, organisations wishing to calculate their own 
supply chain emissions may need to purchase or commission country- 
specific factor sets. This cost creates a potential barrier to organisa­
tions in LMICs. 
This cost may also be difficult to justify, in light of the GHG protocol 
guidance that organisations should look to deploy more granular 
methods than EE-MRIO alone. 
The average carbon intensity of products and industry sectors, varies 
between nations. This is due to differences in the balance between im­
ports versus domestic production and the carbon intensity of domestic 
J. Baddley and F.N. Rasheed                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Cleaner Logistics and Supply Chain 7 (2023) 100109
8
industry sectors, versus that of industry sectors in the countries of origin 
for imported products. 
While the actual emissions intensity of industry sectors, products and 
services vary between nations, we adopted a working assumption that 
the relative carbon intensities of products and sectors would probably be 
fairly consistent. For example, pharmaceuticals and food would be 
carbon intensive in all countries, while telecoms and financial services 
would be less so. This assumption is tested in Appendix J. 
On this basis, rather than sourcing 8 country specific datasets for our 
Tier 2 footprinting, we opted to trial an approach to emissions hotspot 
identification that used the freely available and easily accessed 2017 UK 
DEFRA set of product and service level multipliers, as a ‘secondary 
source’ (University of Leeds, 2020). 
The expectation was that using a UK factor set may underestimate 
emissions, due to the low carbon intensity of UK industry sectors, rela­
tive to intensities indicated by the ‘Rest of the World’ multipliers in the 
EORA26 data (Appendix J). 
Further consideration was given to the potential sensitivity of the 
most common areas of healthcare spend to the use of a UK factor set as a 
proxy. In particular, there was a closer evaluation of the potential im­
pacts on calculations relating to pharmaceuticals, and medical 
consumables. 
Many pharmaceutical and medical products consumed by healthcare 
organisations are common globally. These products are often purchased 
from the same small group of multinational companies. As such, a 
working assumption was made that the carbon intensity per unit of 
product, (based on active ingredients, manufacture, packaging, excipi­
ents, shipping and so on) may be fairly similar between nations. On the 
other hand, the carbon intensity per unit of product for UK and EU 
manufactured healthcare products may tend to be lower compared to 
the rest of the world as suggested by the EORA ‘Manufacturing & 
recycling’ data. 
The use of a UK factor for medical products, if based on a high level of 
EU manufacturing, could result in an underestimate of emissions for 
spend on products manufactured in LMICs. 
However, as the UK has a largely centralised procurement system for 
healthcare products, the average costs of healthcare products in the UK 
may be relatively lower than the rest of the world, increasing the 
apparent carbon intensity per unit of currency for these products in a UK 
factor set. 
In this case the use of a UK factor for medical products could result in 
an overestimate of emissions for products manufactured in LMICs. 
Work by the Committee on Ways and Means of the United States 
Congress in 2019 showed the relative per capita spending on a selection 
of 79 drugs for 12 OECD countries (The Committee on Ways and Means, 
United States Congress, 2019). This showed that the average spending 
on these drugs across the 12 countries was $675.25 per capita per year, 
while in the UK the equivalent spending was around 30% less at 
$469.00. If the per capita costs for drugs in our 8 countries were similar 
to, or greater than, the average across these 12 countries, the use of a UK 
factor could in theory overestimate the carbon intensity of pharma­
ceuticals by more than 30%. 
Potential error also existed in the use of exchange rates. To allow the 
UK multipliers to be used, AKDN spend in local currencies and the UK 
multipliers needed to be converted to US$. 
A further potential source of error is in the alignment of AKDN 
spending categories with the UK EE-MRIO factor set. Assumptions in 
alignment are covered in Appendix C. 
While the approach to our Tier 2 level of footprinting had clear risks 
in terms of accuracy, if it proved to be effective, at least in identifying 
emissions hotspots, then effort could be more usefully focussed on 
sourcing specific carbon intensities for the suppliers in those identified 
hotspot areas (Tier 3 data). As such, the level of potential error seemed 
tolerable for hot-spotting and a high-level estimate. 
5.3. Tier 3 approach 
Tier 3 footprinting also presented some limitations, though far less 
significant than Tier 2. While effort was made to ensure that a consistent 
approach was taken to generating supplier carbon intensities, we were 
reliant on accurate and complete information being reported by sup­
pliers. Appendix E and F provide supplier data and more detail on the 
approach taken, including data that justifies the exclusion of Scope 3 
downstream emissions categories. 
For 3 suppliers revenue needed to be converted from the currency 
used in their annual financial reports to US$ using the annual average 
exchange rate for the reporting year. 
It is also possible that the multinational suppliers for whom data was 
available represented the lowest carbon intensities in the market. 
5.4. Tier 4 approach 
Tier 4 footprinting followed GHGP standards. Full data sets were 
available for each country, no extrapolation was necessary. Emissions 
factors and the data provided from healthcare operations were credible, 
complete, and up to date. Data on energy, fuel, waste, water, business 
travel, anaesthetic gases, refrigerants, respiratory inhalers, and where 
possible building materials was collected directly from operational 
teams who entered data into the AKDN carbon management tool. Data 
provided quarterly was quality assured in country by a national lead. 
National data was then submitted centrally, and quality assured again by 
the author. 
The only exclusions from Tier 4 were the Scope 3 emissions associ­
ated with ‘well to tank’ and ‘transmissions and distribution’ for fuels and 
electricity and the carbon impacts of water use. 
6. Conclusion 
6.1. Key learning points  
• The carbon intensity per US$ of healthcare in LMICs is relatively 
high, and healthcare in LMICs needs to grow rapidly. The social, 
economic, and environmental benefits of decarbonising healthcare 
are potentially high in LMICs.  
• Very few healthcare carbon footprints are available for LMICs and 
none for LICs. Where these are available, they are based on top-down 
EE-MRIO approaches.  
• There is no perfect way to calculate GHG emissions in the healthcare 
supply chain. At an operational level, EE-MRIO approaches provide 
little value beyond highlighting hotspots.  
• Carbon footprinting scope 1 and 2 emissions for healthcare in LMICs 
is not necessarily any more difficult than in any other part of the 
world. One key barrier to date has been a lack of access to tools, data, 
and expertise. This paper shows that this is a resolvable challenge.  
• Carbon footprinting the healthcare supply chain in LMICs and 
higher-income countries alike, with sufficient granularity to effec­
tively target and measure the impact of supplier engagement, is now 
entirely possible. The need to rely on EE-MRIO models is declining.  
• Many large healthcare suppliers now publish data on their carbon 
emissions, and all of these suppliers have far lower reported carbon 
intensities than suggested by EE-MRIO models. 
6.2. Recommendations for healthcare providers 
All healthcare providers in LMICs should consider calculating a 
carbon footprint, covering both direct and indirect emissions, and 
identify opportunities to reduce emissions. Carbon reduction is usually 
associated with energy or resource efficiency, as such can lead to direct 
or indirect cost savings. 
To achieve this, healthcare providers in LMICs should consider 
making use of the freely available carbon management tool and 
J. Baddley and F.N. Rasheed                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Cleaner Logistics and Supply Chain 7 (2023) 100109
9
associated guide developed by AKDN (AKDN, 2021a,b). This Tool is 
currently being highlighted by the World Health Organisation for use by 
healthcare operations in its Africa, and Eastern Mediterranean regions. 
In generating a carbon footprint for the supply chain, all healthcare 
organisations in LMICs and higher-income countries alike should look to 
go beyond EE-MRIO methodologies, as these have limited practical use 
on their own at an operational level. Organisations should request that 
larger suppliers provide carbon footprints, carbon intensities, targets, 
and annual progress reports. Smaller national or regional suppliers can 
be asked to calculate and report on their basic scope 1 and 2 emissions 
using the AKDN carbon management tool or another equivalent 
resource. 
Healthcare organisations should challenge their suppliers to cut 
emissions, where possible looking to procure from suppliers that are 
actively and successfully doing so. This is especially critical when 
choosing suppliers of pharmaceuticals and medical products. 
The healthcare operations of AKDN found that the refined hybrid 
approach, and the excel tool developed to implement it, simplified 
footprinting for supply chain and non-supply chain areas, avoiding the 
need for external consultants and enabling a rapid focus on the areas of 
supply chain where most impact was possible. 
AKDN aimed to reduce uncertainties in pulling together data from a 
mixture of sources of differing resolutions. This has been achieved 
through applying a 4-tier hierarchy to data quality, allowing the quality 
of AKDNs footprint to be improved sequentially, as additional data 
became available. 
Critical analysis of the outputs of AKDNs footprinting work suggests 
that the refined hybrid approach provided a sufficiently robust basis for 
targeting supplier engagement. It also appears to provide a step up in 
terms of accuracy vs top-down only methodologies. Footprinting at this 
level provides an organisation with the opportunity to target and 
actively select suppliers on the basis of emissions intensity, or their 
progress in carbon reduction. This has the potential to increase market- 
incentives for suppliers to engage in carbon reduction measures. 
Full scope 1,2 and 3 footprints for suppliers are increasing in avail­
ability, quality, and consistency. However, unless procurement policies 
and supplier engagement from healthcare providers in LMICs align with 
those in HICs already acting in this area, suppliers may be tempted to 
reduce emissions for operations in HICs by redirecting their higher 
carbon products to LMICs. 
Some multinational healthcare suppliers have larger annual reve­
nues than the entire GDP of smaller LMICs. To reduce healthcare supply 
chain emissions globally, healthcare providers in LMICs and higher-in­
come countries will need to build a uniform approach to applying pur­
chasing power and to drive down supplier’s carbon emissions. All 
suppliers will ultimately need to be incentivised and supported to 
measure, report, and reduce their emissions. 
6.3. Recommendations for further work 
Several areas for further study have been identified throughout this 
paper, these include.  
• Additional published bottom-up footprints are needed for healthcare 
providers in LMICs. These could be produced using the AKDN tool or 
other similar resources.  
• Additional published top-down EE-MRIO footprints are needed for 
healthcare sectors in LMICs, especially LICs which are currently 
absent from the literature.  
• Generation (and publication for free access) of EE-MRIO sector 
emissions intensities/ multipliers for LMICs 
• Additional comparative work, using country specific EE-MRIO fac­
tors for the countries we have studied, to assess the impact on ac­
curacy of the use of a UK factor set as a proxy.  
• Further work to establish why there is such an apparent divergence 
between top down EE-MRIO intensities for pharmaceuticals and 
medical products and the carbon intensities calculated by multina­
tional suppliers of these products.  
• Additional independent research on the full Scope 1,2 and 3 carbon 
intensity of healthcare suppliers, particularly smaller national, 
regional or LMIC based suppliers that currently do not publish full 
emissions data.   
To receive the latest version of AKDN’s Health Carbon Management Tool and the 
user’s Guide, contact: healthcarbonfootprint@akdn.org.  
Declaration of Competing Interest 
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper. 
Data availability 
The data that has been used is confidential. 
Appendix A. Supplementary data 
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.clscn.2023.100109. 
References 
AKDN. (2021). AKDN Health Carbon Management Tool. Geneva: AKDN. 
AKDN. (2021). Calculating the carbon footprint of the Aga Khan Health Services. Geneva: 
AKDN. 
AKDN. (2022, March 2). Retrieved from AKDN Environment and Climate Commitment 
Statement: https://d1zah1nkiby91r.cloudfront.net/s3fs-public/2022.03.02_akdn_e 
cc_commitment_statement-_2_march_2022-_final_approved_1.pdf. 
Arup & HCWH. (2019). Healthcare’s-climate-footprint. 
DEFRA & DBEIS. (2021). UK Government GHG Conversion Factors for Company 
Reporting. (1). London: UK Government. Retrieved from https://www.gov.uk/gov 
ernment/publications/greenhouse-gas-reporting-conversion-factors-2021. 
Eckelman, M., Huang, K., Lagasse, R., Senay, E., Dubrow, R., Sherman, J., 2020. Health 
care pollution and public health damage in the United States: an update. Health Aff 
39, 2071–2209. https://doi.org/10.1377/hlthaff.2020.01247. 
Eckelman, M.J., Sherman, J.D., MacNeill, A.J., Patz, J.A., 2018. Life cycle environmental 
emissions and health damages from the Canadian healthcare system: an economic- 
environmental-epidemiological analysis. PLoS Med. 15 (7), e1002623. 
England, N.H.S., 2020. Delivering a ‘Net Zero’ National Health Service. NHS England, 
London.  
IEA. (2020). Emissions factors 2020. Paris: IEA. Retrieved 2020, from https://prod.iea. 
org/data-and-statistics/data-product/emissions-factors-2021#emissions-factors. 
Lenzen, M., Malik, A., Li, M., Fry, J., Weisz, H., Pichler, P.-P., Chaves, L.S.M., Capon, A., 
Pencheon, D., 2020. The environmental footprint of health care: a global assessment. 
Lancet Planet. Health 4 (7), e271–e279. 
Malik, A., Lenzen, M., McAlister, S., McGain, F., 2018. The carbon footprint of Australian 
health care. Lancet Planet. Health 2, e27–e35. https://doi.org/10.1016/s2542-5196 
(19)30192-5. 
Nansai, K., Fry, J., Malik, A., Takayanagi, W., Kondo, N., 2020. Carbon footprint of 
Japanese health care services from 2011 to 2015. Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 152, 
104525 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2019.104525. 
IPCC. (2020, Nov). IPCC Emissions Factor Database. Retrieved from IPPC: https://www.ip 
cc-nggip.iges.or.jp/EFDB/downloads.php. 
Pichler, P.-P., Jaccard, I.S., Weisz, U., Weisz, H., 2019. International comparison of 
health care carbon footprints. Int. Compar. Health Care Carbon Footprints 14 (6), 
064004. 
Rasheed, N.F., Baddley, J., 2021. Decarbonising healthcare in low and middle income 
countries: potential pathways to net zero emissions. BMJ 375 (n1284). https://doi. 
org/10.1136/bmj.n1284. 
Stadler, K., Lonka, R., Moran, D., Pallas, G., & Wood, R. (2015). The Environmental 
Footprints Explorer - a database for global sustainable accounting. Retrieved December 
21, 2021, from https://www.environmentalfootprints.org/explorer. 
Statista. (2021). Global pharmaceutical industry- key figures. Retrieved December 19, 2021, 
from https://www.statista.com/topics/1764/global-pharmaceutical-industry/ 
#dossierKeyfigures. 
Tennison, I., Roschnik, S., Ashby, B., Boyd, R., Hamilton, I., Oreszczyn, T., Owen, A., 
Romanello, M., Ruyssevelt, P., Sherman, J.D., Smith, A.Z.P., Steele, K., Watts, N., 
Eckelman, M.J., 2021. Health care’s response to climate change: a carbon footprint 
assessment of the NHS in England. Lancet Planetary Health 5 (2), e84–e92. 
J. Baddley and F.N. Rasheed                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Cleaner Logistics and Supply Chain 7 (2023) 100109
10
The Committee on Ways and Means, United States Congress. (2019). A Painful Pill to 
Swallow U.S. vs. International Prescription Drug Prices. Washington D.C. 
University of Leeds, 2020. UK Footprint Results (1990–2017). University of Leeds, Leeds.  
WHO. (2015). Global Health Expenditure Database. Retrieved June 2, 2022, from https://a 
pps.who.int/nha/database/ViewData/Indicators/en. 
WRI & WBCSD, 2004. A Corporate Accounting and Reporting Standard (REVISED, 
EDITION ed. World Resources Institute and World Business Council for Sustainable 
Development, Geneva.  
WRI & WBCSD. (2004). Retrieved from GHGProtocol.org: https://ghgprotocol.org/sites 
/default/files/standards/ghg-protocol-revised.pdf. 
WRI & WBCSD. (2013). Corporate Value Chain (Scope 3) Accounting and Reporting 
Standard. USA. 
Wu, R., 2019. The carbon footprint of the Chinese health-care system: an 
environmentally extended input-output and structural path analysis stud. Lancet 
Planet Health 3, e413–e419. 
J. Baddley and F.N. Rasheed                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
